Three Chinese astronauts today blasted off on a mission to carry out the country's first spacewalk.

Shengzhou 7 launched from the site in Jiuquan, north-west China, just after 9.10pm (2.10pm BST).

Shortly after the launch the astronauts told the Beijing control centre they felt "physically sound".

Depending on how well the astronauts acclimatise to weightlessness and the other physical demands of their environment, the spacewalk, which will only involve one of the astronauts actually leaving the orbit module, should take place on Friday or Saturday. They will then return to Earth.

China's president, Hu Jintao, who watched the take-off from the launch centre, earlier told the astronauts: "I believe you will have complete success in this glorious and sacred mission. The motherland and people are waiting for your triumphant return."

The mission is China's third manned space venture since October 2003 when it joined Russia and the US as the only countries to have sent astronauts into orbit.

A Chinese foreign ministry spokesman, Liu Jianchao, emphasised today that the country's aspirations were simply to "explore and make peaceful use of outer space".

Other nations are less sure, especially after China used a ballistic missile to shoot down one of its own defunct satellites in January this year. A few months later, a senior US general argued that Beijing was "aggressively" developing space weaponry technology.

Today, Kevin Pollpeter, an expert on China's space programme from the Defence Group Inc in Washington DC, described the mission as "a very outward show of Chinese power".

"The eventual goal is to build a space station. For them, that's become one of the trappings of being a great power," he told Reuters.

The three astronauts are Zhai Zhigang, Liu Boming and Jing Haipeng, all aged 42. Two of them will don spacesuits for the spacewalk, although the pair who will enter the orbit module have yet to be named.

Their task will be to take samples for tests. The crew will also release a small monitoring satellite and trial another satellite during the mission.

China has developed its own EVA (extra-vehicular activity) spacesuit, which cost 30 million yuan (£2.37m), described by Hu as "a great leap for China's space technology".

One astronaut taking part in the spacewalk will wear the Chinese Feitian suit while the other will wear a Russian suit. Wang Zhaoyao, a spokesman with China's manned space programme said that Russian experts would provide technical support throughout the mission.

China's Xinhua news agency reported that dozens of types of medications, including newly developed traditional Chinese medicine capsules, had been loaded on to the rocket.

